---
title: "Atari Punk Console"
date: 2024-12-01T15:35:10-08:00
url: /projects/atari-punk-console
draft: false
---

{{< figure src="IMG_4649.jpeg" caption="BEHOLD." width="50%" lightbox="atari-punk-console" >}}

This project got its start when I was bored one day, then remembered I
had a 555 timer that I had never used before.  I decided to wire it
up, and before too long I had a [simple metronome going][0].  I got
inspired and ordered a batch of 50 (!) 555s from AliExpress -- for $2,
how could I not?

While waiting for them to come in, I started looking for something to
do with them -- and came across the [Atari Punk Console][1].  I
remembered I *also* had an LM386 I hadn't used, so decided to [throw
it into the works as well][2].  I managed to get something
breadboarded together that actually made sound, and in a fit of
ambition declared I would make a permanent version.

This is where I am *really* well out of my depth, as opposed to merely
inexperienced.  But I did the right thing by using a relatively large
prototype board, and after a few weekends (plus some time out for
COVID) I had something that...made noise! ðŸ¤£

For sound, I used an old bluetooth speaker; it had an AUX input, so I
grabbed a headphone cable I wasn't using to hook it up.  For reasons I
don't really understand I had to hook up the speaker wires differently
than I thought I would: Instead of the red black wire being hooked up
to the LM386 output, I had to hook up the *shield* wire from the cable
to the 2nd 555 output (pin 3) in order to get any sound.  This worked
fine, and I was able to use the speaker's built-in volume controls to
adjust the volume.

For power, I used a USB cable from an old lamp.   This worked a treat.

And for an enclosure...well, you don't put work like this in just
*any* old project box.  No sir, the box you need for *this* is a
carboard shipping box from Orchard (well recommended for used phones,
BTW).  I was able to mount the volume cables nicely:

{{< figure src="IMG_4650.jpeg" caption="Avert your eyes, the glory is blinding" width="50%" lightbox="atari-punk-console" >}}

There was lots of room inside the box to show off the proto board,
complete with hot glue holding power & audio cable in place.  And
since I wasn't using the LM386, I decided to remove it and save it for
another day:

{{< figure src="IMG_4651.jpeg" caption="Interior" width="50%" lightbox="atari-punk-console" >}}

The final touch were the labels for the top of the box.  My son agreed
that one button should be labelled `PWN` -- then had the brilliant
insight that the opposite of `PWN` was clearly `JANK`.  One quick trip
to the laser printer later, *e eccolo*:

{{< figure src="labels.png" caption="jank vs pwn" width="50%" lightbox="atari-punk-console" >}}

Overall it was a lot of fun.  Some lessons:

- This protoboard could have been organized a lot better.  The squares
  practically scream out to be used to isolate different components.
  If I were redoing this, I'd avoid putting all 3 chips in a row -- it
  looks nice, but I suspect it would be easier to work with if I'd
  laid them out separately.

- The ground and VCC bus approach worked well.

- The second pot (the one labelled `pwn`) was scratchy even after
  replacing it and re-soldering the wires to the board.  I'm not sure
  what went on there.

- And I *really* don't know what went wrong with the LM386 amplifer --
  but the speaker made that a moot point.

- I still really like cardboard as a building material; it's quick to
  find, easy to work with, and the janky look just tickles me.

The next version I want to make is the version with [an 8-step
sequencer](https://oshwlab.com/dmitriy.prangov/Atari-Punk-Console-with-8-step-sequencer).
This *really* makes some neat sounds, and I would never have thought
of using a decade counter that way.  Excelsior!

[0]: https://www.build-electronic-circuits.com/555-timer-metronome-circuit/
[1]: https://www.build-electronic-circuits.com/atari-punk-console/
[2]: http://samvssound.com/projects/amplifiers/lm386-power-amplifier/
